Add initial i18n documentation (#222)
eclipsesource/jsonforms2-website: content/docs/i18n.mdx

---
id: i18n
title: i18n
description: Translate jsonforms
---

import I18nExample from '../../src/components/docs/i18n';

:::note

Please note that the renderer sets themselves are not yet translatable.
You can find the current status here:
https://github.com/eclipsesource/jsonforms/issues/1826

:::

The translate functionality of JSONForms is integrated into the core component.

> In order to translate JSONForms, you need to set a translation function and provide it to the JSONForms object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to translate JSONForms, you need to set a translation function and provide it to the JSONForms component:
```

```ts
const translator = (key, defaultMessage) => {
  console.log(`Key: ${key}, Default Message: ${defaultMessage}`);
  return defaultMessage;
};

const [locale, setLocale] = useState<'de'|'en'>('de');

<JsonForms
  i18n={{locale: locale, translate: translator}}
  ...
/>
```

> The i18n prop consist of three components: `locale`, `translate`, `translateError`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The i18n prop consist of three components: `locale`, `translate` and `translateError`. 
```

## `locale`

Allows to specify the current locale of the application.

> This can be used by renderers to render locale specific UI elements (for example formatting of dates).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be used by renderers to render locale specific UI elements, for example for locale-aware formatting of numbers.
```

## `translate`

Allows to provide a translation function, which handles the actual translation.

:::caution

The translate function should be side effect free and should be stable (memoized) to avoid unnecessary re-renderings, i.e. the translate function should only change if there are new translations.

:::

> 

Reviewer: State the type of the `translate` function, i.e. `(key: string, defaultMessage: string | undefined) => string | undefined)`

The translate function has the following parameters:

### `key`

The key is used to identify the string, that needs to be translated.
It can be set using the `UI Schema`, the `JSON Schema` or is generated by default based on the property path.

#### UI Schema option

The key can be set via the `i18n` UI Schema option:
```json
{ 
  "type": "Control", 
  "label": "name", 
  "scope": "#/properties/name", 
  "options": { 
    "i18n": "customName" 
  } 
}
```

Therefore the translation will be invoked with `customName.label` & `customName.description`.

#### JSON Schema

The key can also be set with the custom JSON Schema `i18n` option:
```json
{
  "name": { 
    "type": "string", 
    "i18n": "myCustomName" 
  }
} 
```

Therefore the translation will be invoked with `myCustomName.label` & `myCustomName.description`.

#### Default: Property path

Is none of the above is set, the property path will be used as the key.

> e.g. `name`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is none of the above is set, the property path will be used as the key.
```

```
{
  properties: {
    firstName: {
      type: "string"
    },
    address: {
      type: "object",
      properties: {
        street: {
          type: "string"
        }
      }
    }
    comments: {
      type: "array",
      items: {
        type: "object",
        properties: {
          message: {
            type: "string"
          },
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The paths in the above example would be:
- `firstName.label` & `firstName.description`
- `address.street.label` & `address.street.description`

> - `comments.message.label` & `comments.message.description` (the path for arrays will not contain indices)

Reviewer: Can you check whether `address.label`, `address.description` and `comments.label`, `comments.description` is also called?

### `defaultMessage`

The default message is provided by JSONForms and can act as a fallback or could be translated.

:::note

If the defaultMessage is `undefined` it should not be modified and still return as `undefined` (and not an empty string or similar).

> JSON Forms will use `undefined  when the message could be skipped or another generic key could be tried. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `defaultMessage` is `undefined` you should also return `undefined` if you don't have a translation for the given key.
Returning an empty string (or something similar) instead may result in undesired behavior.
JSON Forms will use `undefined` when the message could be skipped or another more generic key could be tried.
```

:::

### `values`

The values can contain additional context, if the key of the string is not enough to determine the correct translation.

> For example all error translations will have the error as part of the values object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The values can contain additional context for the current translation.
For example all error translations will have the AJV error object as part of the values object.
```

> 

Reviewer: I would expect something like this here to complete the documentation on `i18n` attributes

## `translateError`

The `translateError` function is called whenever a single message is to be extracted from an AJV error object.

The type of the `translateError` function is

```
(error: ErrorObject, translate: Translator, uischema?: UISchemaElement) => string
```

- The `error` is the AJV error object
- `translate` is the i18n `translate` function handed over to JSON Forms
- In cases where a UI Schema Element can be correlated to an `error` it will also be handed over
- The `translateError` function always returns a `string`

Usually this method does not need to be customized as JSON Forms already provides a sensible default implementation.
A reason to customize this method could be to integrate third party frameworks like `ajv-i18n`.

For more information about how errors can be customized, see the following section

## Error Customizations

> TODO: Description

Reviewer: For each control a list of errors are determined.
This section describes the default behavior of JSON forms to offer translation support for them.

> #### `<i18nkey>.error.custom`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `<i18nkey>.error.custom`
```

> 

Reviewer: Before invoking the `translateError` function, JSON Forms will check whether a `<i18nkey>.error.custom` translation exists.

> If `error.custom` is set, just a single error will be output, no matter how many errors are present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `<i18nkey>.error.custom` is set, just this single message will be used, no matter how many errors are present.
```

The `translate` function is called for `error.custom`
The `translateError` function is called for each error.

> By default it behaves like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This is useful if there are many JSON Schema validaton keywords defined for a single property, but a single cohesive message shall be displayed.
```

## `translateError`

The `translateError` is called for every AJV error. 
`translateError` is an optional parameter to the i18n object. Usually it is not expected to customize this option.

> By default error it works like this:

Reviewer: If no `<i18nkey>.error.custom` message is returned by the `translate` function, `translateError` will be called for each AJV error and the results combined.

The default implementation of `translateError` will invoke `translate` multiple times to determine the best message for the given error.
Therefore it's usually not necessary to customize `translateError` itself.

`<i18nkey>` in the sections below refers to the key of the field (see `key` section above).

### Evaluation order

#### `<i18nkey>.error.<keyword>`

> e.g. `name.error.required`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example keys: `name.error.required`, `address.street.error.pattern`
```

> If no `error.custom` is set, the translator will look for a concrete message for a specific field and a specific error. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default `translateError` will first look for a concrete message for a specific field and a specific error type.
```

> In the example above, the function will look for a `required` error on the `name` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### `error.<keyword>`

> e.g. `error.required`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example keys: `error.required`, `error.pattern`
```

> If no specific field error message is set, the translator will then look for an error message, that is independent of the field. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After checking field specific translations, `translateError` will then look for form-wide translations of errors, independent of each respective field.
```

> In the example case above, the function will look for a `required` error translation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful to customize for example `required` or `pattern` messages for all properties.
```

> #### Default error translator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### error message
```

> Next the translator will look for a default message, which is provided by the core framework.

Reviewer: At last the default `translateError` implementation will check whether the `message` of the error object has a specific translation.

#### Default AJV error message

> If none of the above are set and no default error is available, the error message provided by AJV will be output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If none of the above apply, the `message` provided by the AJV error object will be used.
```

### Example

> If we have the following schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the following schema for an object attribute:
```

```js
{
  phone: {
    type: "string",
    minLength: 10,
    pattern: "^[\+]?[(]?[0-9]{3}[)]?[-\s\.]?[0-9]{3}[-\s\.]?[0-9]{4,6}$"
  }
}
```

> And the order in which the error keys are evaluated is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The order in which the error keys are evaluated is the following:
```

> - `phone.error.custom`: if this is set, the `pattern` and `minLength` error will be ignore and just this message is output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `phone.error.custom`: if this is set, the `pattern` and `minLength` errors will be ignores and just this message is used
```

- `phone.error.pattern` & `phone.error.minLength`
- `error.pattern` & `error.minLength`

## Enum translation

> Enum translations are a little different then the other control translations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enum translations are based on the respective entries:
 - For JSON Schema `enum`, the stringified value is used.
 - For JSON Schema `oneOf` enums which consist of (`title`, `const`) pairs a specialized `i18n` key or `title` is used.

> In order to translate enum values, you need to add one additional attribute to the translation for every value. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Therefore, in order to translate enum values, an additional key is checked for each enum entry.
```

For example:
Let's assume we have a field `Gender`, which has three possible values: 
- `Male`
- `Female`

> - `Other`

Reviewer: Let's assume we have an enum attribute `gender`, which looks like this:

```js
{
  gender: {
    type: "string",
    enum: ["male", "female", "other"]
  }
}
```

In this case the `translate` function will be invoked with the keys `gender.male`, `gender.female` and `gender.other` to translate these enum values.
In case `gender` had an `i18n` property, it would be used instead, i.e. `<i18nkey>.male` etc.

Let's assume we have a `oneOf` enum attribute gender which looks like this:
```js
{
  gender: {
    oneOf: [
      {
        title: "Male",
        const: 0
      },
      {
        title: "Female",
        const: "f",
        i18n: "fem"
      },
      {
        const: null
      }
    ]
  }
}
```
Here the requested keys are:
 - `gender.Male` - property path + `title` of the `oneOf` entry
 - `fem` - direct usage of the `i18n` property for the `oneOf` entry
 - `null` - the `title` attribute is missing, therefore the `null` value is stringified to `'null'`.

> If we now want to translate these, we need to reference them in the translation like this:
> ```js
> gender: {
>   label: 'Geschlecht',
>   description: 'Das Geschlecht auswählen',
>   Male: 'Männlich',
>   Female: 'Weiblich',
>   Other: 'Divers'
> },
> ```
> 
> So the `label` attribute translates the `label` of the field, just like with any other control field. The same with the `description` attribute.
> All the other options translate the possible values of the enum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Access translation in custom renderer sets

> If you want to access the translation function within a custom renderer set, you can use the JSONForms context for that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to directly access the i18n properties within a custom renderer, you can use the JSONForms context for that:
```

---
id: i18n
title: i18n
description: Translate jsonforms
---

import { I18nExample, ValuesTable } from '../../src/components/docs/i18n';

:::note

Please note that the renderer sets themselves are not yet translatable.
You can find the current status here:
https://github.com/eclipsesource/jsonforms/issues/1826

:::

The translate functionality of JSON Forms is integrated into the core component.
In order to translate JSON Forms, you need to set a translation function and provide it to the JSON Forms component:
```ts
const translator = (key, defaultMessage) => {
  console.log(`Key: ${key}, Default Message: ${defaultMessage}`);
  return defaultMessage;
};

const [locale, setLocale] = useState<'de'|'en'>('de');
const translation = useMemo(() => translator(locale), [locale]);

<JsonForms
  i18n={{locale: locale, translate: translation}}
  ...
/>
```

> The i18n prop consist of three components: `locale`, `translate` and `translateError`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `i18n` prop consists of three components: `locale`, `translate` and `translateError`. 
```

## `locale`

> Allows to specify the current locale of the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifies the current locale of the application.
```

This can be used by renderers to render locale specific UI elements, for example for locale-aware formatting of numbers.

## `translate`

> Allows to provide a translation function, which handles the actual translation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Provides a translation function handling the actual translation.
```

:::caution

The translate function should be side effect free and should be stable (memoized) to avoid unnecessary re-renderings, i.e. the translate function should only change if there are new translations.

:::

The type of the translate is

```ts
(key: string, defaultMessage: string | undefined, context: any) => string | undefined)
```

> and there for has the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the following parameters:
```

### `key`

> The key is used to identify the string, that needs to be translated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key is used to identify the string that needs to be translated.
```

It can be set using the `UI Schema`, the `JSON Schema` or is generated by default based on the property path.

#### UI Schema option

The key can be set via the `i18n` UI Schema option:
```json
{ 
  "type": "Control", 
  "label": "name", 
  "scope": "#/properties/name", 
  "options": { 
    "i18n": "customName" 

>   } 

Reviewer 2: This was changed. `"i18n"` is now a direct child property of the Control, i.e. a sibling to `scope`, etc. See https://github.com/eclipsesource/jsonforms/pull/1944

}
```

> Therefore the translation will be invoked with `customName.label` & `customName.description`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, the translation will be invoked with `customName.label` & `customName.description`.
```

#### JSON Schema

The key can also be set with the custom JSON Schema `i18n` option:
```json
{
  "name": { 
    "type": "string", 
    "i18n": "myCustomName" 
  }
} 
```

> Therefore the translation will be invoked with `myCustomName.label` & `myCustomName.description`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, the translation will be invoked with `myCustomName.label` & `myCustomName.description`.
```

#### Default: Property path

If none of the above is set, the property path will be used as the key.

```json
{
  "properties": {
    "firstName": {
      "type": "string"
    },
    "address": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "street": {
          "type": "string"
        }
      }
    },
    "comments": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "message": {
            "type": "string"
          },
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> The paths in the above example would be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The paths in the above example are:
```

- `firstName.label` & `firstName.description`
- `address.label` & `address.description`
- `address.street.label` & `address.street.description`
- `comments.message.label` & `comments.message.description` (the path for arrays will not contain indices)

### `defaultMessage`

The default message is provided by JSON Forms and can act as a fallback or could be translated.

:::note

> If the `defaultMessage` is `undefined` you should also return `undefined` if you don't have a translation for the given key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `defaultMessage` is `undefined`, you should also return `undefined` if there is no translation for the given key.
```

Returning an empty string (or something similar) instead may result in undesired behavior.
JSON Forms will use `undefined` when the message could be skipped or another more generic key could be tried.

:::

### `context`

`context` can contain additional information for the current translation. The following parameters can be provided:

<ValuesTable/>

> Schema translation provide all properties, while UI schema translations only provide the `uischema`-property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Schema translations provide all properties, while UI schema translations only provide the `uischema` property.
```

{
  gender: {
    type: "string",
    enum: ["male", "female", "other"]
  }
}
```
 
In this case the `translate` function will be invoked with the keys `gender.male`, `gender.female` and `gender.other` to translate these enum values. In case `gender` had an `i18n` property, it would be used instead, i.e. `<i18nkey>.male` etc.
 
Let's assume we have a `oneOf` enum attribute gender which looks like this:
 
```js
{
  gender: {
    oneOf: [
      {
        title: "Male",
        const: 0
      },
      {
        title: "Female",
        const: "f",
        i18n: "fem"
      },
      {
        const: null
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Here the requested keys are:

* `gender.Male` - property path + `title` of the `oneOf` entry
* `fem` - direct usage of the `i18n` property for the `oneOf` entry
* `null` - the `title` attribute is missing, therefore the `null` value is stringified to `'null'`.

## UI Schema Translation

The UI schema has the elements `group`, `category` and `label`, which can also be translated.

If a i18n-key is provided in a `group` or `category` element, `<i18n>.label` will be used as key.  
If no i18n key is provided, the value of the `label`-property is used as key.  

> In case nether a i18n-key nor a label is provided, `<property-path>.label` will be used as default key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case neither a i18n-key nor a label is provided, `<property-path>.label` will be used as default key.
```
